arXiv:astro-ph/0204055v2  31 Oct 2002
Stellar Masses and Star Formation Histories for 10 5
Galaxies from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
Guinevere Kauﬀmann 1, Timothy M. Heckman 2, Simon D.M. White 1 ,
St´ ephane Charlot1, 3, Christy Tremonti 2, Jarle Brinchmann 1,
Gustavo Bruzual 4, Eric W. Peng 2, Mark Seibert 2,
Mariangela Bernardi 5, Michael Blanton 6, Jon Brinkmann 7, Francisco
Castander8, Istvan Cs´ abai9, 2, Masataka Fukugita 10, Zeljko Ivezic 11, Jeﬀrey A.
Munn 12, Robert C. Nichol 13, Nikhil Padmanabhan 14, Aniruddha R. Thakar 2,
David H. Weinberg 15, Donald York 5
1Max-Planck Institut f¨ ur Astrophysik, D-85748 Garching, G ermany
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins Univers ity, Baltimore, MD 21218
3 Institut d’Astrophysique du CNRS, 98 bis Boulevard Arago, F -75014 Paris, France
4 (AE) Centro de Investigaciones de Astronomia, Merida, Vene zuela
5 Department of Astronomy, University of Chicago, 5640 South Ellis Ave, Chicago, IL 60637
6 Department of Physics, New York University, 4 Washington Pl ace, New York, NY 10003
7 Apache Point Observatory, P.O. Box 59, Sunspot, NM 88349
8 Department of Physics, Yale University, P.O. Box 208121, Ne w Haven, CT 06520
9 Department of Physics, Eotvos Lorand University, Pf. 32, H- 1518 Budapest, Hungary
10 Institute for Cosmic Ray Research, University of Tokyo, Chi ba 277-8582, Japan
11 Princeton University Observatory, Peyton Hall, Princeton NJ 08544-1001
12 US Naval Observatory, Flagstaﬀ Station, P.O. Box 1149, Flag staﬀ, AZ 86002
13 Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Fo rbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15232
14 Department of Physics, Princeton University , Princeton NJ 08544
15 Department of Astronomy, Ohio State University, 140 West 18 th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210
Abstract
We develop a new method to constrain the star formation histo ries, dust at-
tenuation and stellar masses of galaxies. It is based on two s tellar absorption line
indices, the 4000 ˚
A break strength and the Balmer absorption line index H δ A.
Together, these indices allow us to constrain the mean stell ar ages of galaxies and
the fractional stellar mass formed in bursts over the past fe w Gyr. A compari-
son with broad band photometry then yields estimates of dust attenuation and of
stellar mass. We generate a large library of Monte Carlo real izations of diﬀerent
star formation histories, including starbursts of varying strength and a range of
metallicities. We use this library to generate median likel ihood estimates of burst
mass fractions, dust attenuation strengths, stellar masse s and stellar mass-to-light
ratios for a sample of 122,808 galaxies drawn from the Sloan D igital Sky Survey.
The typical 95% conﬁdence range in our estimated stellar mas ses is ± 40 %. We
study how the stellar mass-to-light ratios of galaxies vary as a function of absolute
magnitude, concentration index and photometric pass-band and how dust atten-
uation varies as a function of absolute magnitude and 4000 ˚
A break strength.
We also calculate how the total stellar mass of the present Un iverse is distributed
over galaxies as a function of their mass, size, concentrati on, colour, burst mass
fraction and surface mass density. We ﬁnd that most of the ste llar mass in the
local Universe resides in galaxies that have, to within a fac tor of about 2, stellar
masses ∼ 5× 1010M⊙, half-light radii ∼ 3 kpc, and half-light surface mass densities
∼ 109M⊙kpc−2. The distribution of D n(4000) is strongly bimodal, showing a clear
division between galaxies dominated by old stellar populat ions and galaxies with
more recent star formation.
Keywords: galaxies:formation,evolution; galaxies: stel lar content
1
1 Introduction
The masses of galaxies are traditionally estimated by dynam ical methods from the kinematics
of their stars and gas. Ever since extended HI rotation curve s were ﬁrst measured for spirals,
it has been clear that the implied masses include not only the observed material, but also
substantial amounts of dark matter. Indeed, it is now believ ed that most galaxies are sur-
rounded by dark halos which extend to many times their optica l radii and contain an order
of magnitude more mass than the visible components. The prop erties of these halos can be
inferred directly from tracers at large radii such as X-ray e mitting atmospheres, systems of
satellite galaxies, or weak gravitational distortion of ba ckground galaxy images. In practice,
gaseous atmospheres are visible only around some bright ell iptical galaxies, while the other
two techniques are too noisy to apply to individual galaxies ; they are used to obtain average
halo properties for stacked samples of similar galaxies (Za ritsky et al 1993 ; McKay et al
2002).
In order to understand how galaxies formed, we would like to m ap the relationship between
the properties of the observed baryonic components of galax ies and those of their dark halos.
This mapping should yield information about how the baryons cooled, condensed and turned
into stars as the halo-galaxy systems were assembled, and sh ould clarify the complex physical
processes that regulated the eﬃciency and timing of galaxy f ormation.
Most studies of the halo-galaxy relation have used luminosi ty as a surrogate for total
baryon content, and a kinematic measure – peak rotation velo city, stellar velocity dispersion,
X-ray atmosphere temperature – as a surrogate for halo mass. Both surrogates are far from
ideal. Kinematic measures are strongly aﬀected by the visib le components of the galaxy and
so have an uncertain relation to halo mass; only satellite an d weak lensing studies can reliably
estimate total halo masses, albeit as an average over all gal axies in a chosen class. Galaxy
luminosity may not correlate well with stellar mass (the dom inant baryonic component in all
but a subset of the smallest systems). There are strong depen dences on the fraction of young
stars in the galaxy and on its dust content. Thus a technique t o correct for attenuation by
dust and to estimate the mass-to-light ratio of the underlyi ng stellar population is needed to
estimate the stellar mass of a galaxy.
It is well-known that luminosities are less aﬀected by stell ar population variations in the
near-infrared than in the optical, and that extinction corr ections are also smaller at longer
wavelengths. Recently Verheijen (2001) studied the B, R, I a nd K’-band Tully-Fisher relations
of a volume-limited sample of 49 spiral galaxies in the Ursa M ajor Cluster. He showed that
the K’-band relation exhibited the tightest correlation wi th rotation velocity, suggesting that
the stellar masses of galaxies are linked closely with the ma sses of the dark matter halos in
which they formed. The larger scatter in the shorter wavelen gth passbands was attributed
to variations in star formation history and dust extinction between diﬀerent galaxies in the
sample.
Although near-infrared luminosities are less dependent on star formation history than
optical luminosities, they nevertheless exhibit some sens itivity to stellar age. Bell & de Jong
2
(2001) estimate that the near-infrared mass-to-light rati os of local spirals can vary by as
much as a factor of two and propose a correction based on the op tical colours of the galaxies.
Brinchmann & Ellis (2000) also used colour-based methods to transform the near-infrared
magnitudes of a sample of intermediate redshift galaxies in to stellar masses. In both analyses,
it was assumed that the star formation histories of galaxies could be described by simple
exponential laws. If galaxies formed a major ( > 10%) fraction of their stars in recent bursts,
it was shown that this would introduce substantial errors in to the estimated mass-to-light
ratios.
In this paper, we make use of spectral indicators as diagnost ics of the past star formation
histories of galaxies. In particular, two spectral feature s, the 4000 ˚
A break and the H δ
absorption line, provide important information about the a ges of the stellar populations in
galaxies and are able to distinguish recent star formation h istories dominated by bursts from
those that are more continuous. We develop a method based on t hese two indicators and
on broad-band photometry that allows us to derive maximum li kelihood estimates of the
stellar mass of a galaxy, the attenuation of its starlight by dust, and the fraction of its stars
formed in recent bursts. We apply our method to a sample of ∼ 120, 000 galaxies drawn
from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and show how the derived ste llar mass-to-light ratios of
galaxies in four Sloan bandpasses ( g, r, i and z; Fukugita et al 1996) depend both on galaxy
luminosity and on structural parameters such as concentrat ion index. We also compute the
fraction of the total stellar mass in the Universe in galaxie s of diﬀerent masses, sizes, colours
and concentrations. The dependence of galaxy properties on stellar mass is addressed in a
separate paper (Kauﬀmann et al 2002; Paper II)
2 Description of the Observational Sample and Spectral
Reductions
The sample of galaxies analyzed in this paper is drawn from th e Sloan Digital Sky Survey.
This survey will obtain u, g, r, i and z photometry of almost a quarter of the sky and spectra
of at least 700,000 objects. The survey goals and procedures are outlined in York et al. (2000)
and a description of the data products and pipelines is given in Stoughton et al.(2002).
Our sample of galaxies is drawn from all available spectrosc opic observations in the SDSS
Data Release One (DR1). We have included all objects spectro scopically classiﬁed as galaxies
with Petrosian r band magnitudes in the range 14 . 5 < r < 17. 77 after correction for foreground
galactic extinction using the reddening maps of Schlegel, F inkbeiner & Davis (1998). This is
equivalent to the ‘main’ galaxy sample designed for large-s cale structure studies. Our sample
contains a total of 122,808 galaxies. More details about the SDSS photometric system may
be found in Fukugita et al (1996) and Smith et al (2002). Infor mation relating to the SDSS
camera and photometric monitoring system can be found in Gun n et al (1998) and Hogg et
al (2001). Details of the spectroscopic target selection of galaxies are given in Strauss et al
(2002).
3
The spectra were reduced using version v4.9.5 of the Spectro 2d pipeline. The processed
spectra are wavelength and ﬂux-calibrated. The spectral in dicators (primarily the 4000 ˚
A
break and the H δ A index) and the emission lines (the equivalent widths and ﬂux es of H α and
Hβ ) that are discussed in this paper are calculated using a spec ial-purpose code described in
detail in Tremonti et al (2002, in preparation). Here we prov ide a brief summary of the main
features of the code.
Galaxies display a very rich stellar absorption line spectr um, which encodes much informa-
tion about their stellar populations, but complicates meas urements of nebular emission lines.
In most early-type galaxies, the [OII], [OIII], and H α emission lines are similar in strength
to ﬂuctuations produced by the many superposed stellar abso rption features. Although late-
type galaxies tend to have stronger emission lines and spect ra dominated by hotter, more
featureless stars, stellar Balmer absorption can still be s ubstantial (2 - 4 ˚
A at H β ).
We therefore perform a careful subtraction of the stellar ab sorption line spectrum before
measuring the nebular emission lines. This is accomplished by ﬁtting the emission line free
regions of the spectrum with a model spectrum. The models are based on the new popu-
lation synthesis code of Bruzual & Charlot (2002, in prepara tion, hereafter BC2002) which
incorporates high resolution (3 ˚
A FWHM) stellar libraries. (Salient details of the librarie s
are discussed further in Section 3). We have generated a set o f 39 template spectra spanning
a wide range in age and metallicity. The template spectra are convolved with a Gaussian
to match the stellar velocity dispersion of each galaxy and r ebinned to the SDSS dispersion
(∆log λ = 10 4). The best ﬁtting model spectrum is constructed from a non-n egative linear
combination of the template spectra, with dust attenuation modeled as a λ −0. 7 power law of
adjustable amplitude (Charlot & Fall 2000).
In Fig. 1, we plot two representative SDSS galaxy spectra ove r the wavelength interval
3700-4400 ˚
A (restframe), which includes both the 4000 ˚
A break and the H δ absorption features
that are used extensively in this paper. The upper panel in Fi g. 1 shows the spectrum of a
star-forming galaxy with strong Balmer emission lines, whi le the lower panel shows a typical
early-type galaxy with strong stellar absorption features . The red lines in Fig.1 show the best
ﬁt model to the stellar absorption spectrum over the wavelen gth interval from 3600 to 6800
˚
A. We ﬁnd that in general, the BC2002 models reproduce the mai n stellar absorption features
of galaxies in the SDSS survey extremely well.
A more detailed analysis of the spectral ﬁts will be presente d in Tremonti et al (2002). We
note that the top panel of Fig. 1 demonstrates that in star for ming galaxies, high resolution
models are required in order to separate the Balmer emission lines from the under lying stellar
absorption features in a reliable way. Without these models , the accuracy of the emission
line measurements is compromised by an unknown correction f or stellar absorption. Likewise,
stellar continuum indices such as H δ A will be contaminated by emission-lines unless these can
be removed.
All magnitudes quoted in this paper are Petrosian magnitude s. For the SDSS, the Petrosian
radius is deﬁned as the largest radius at which the local r-band surface brightness is at least
one ﬁfth the mean surface brightness interior to that radius . The Petrosian ﬂux is then
4
the total ﬂux within a circular aperture two times the Petros ian radius. Details about the
Petrosian ﬂux measurements are given in Lupton et al (2002) a nd Strauss et al (2002). The
SDSS Petrosian magnitude detects essentially all the light from galaxies with exponential
proﬁles and more than 80% of the light from galaxies with de Va ucouleurs proﬁles.
Conversions from apparent magnitude to absolute magnitude depend on cosmology through
the distance modulus DM(z) and on galaxy type through the K-c orrection K(z):
M = m − DM (z) − K(z). (1)
We assume a Friedman-Robertson-Walker cosmology with Ω = 0 . 3, Λ = 0 . 7 and H 0= 70
km s −1 Mpc−1. We calculate the K-corrections K(z) for each galaxy using the routines in
kcorrect v1 11 (Blanton et al. 2002). In order to minimize the errors in this procedure,
we K-correct the magnitudes of all galaxies in our sample to z = 0 . 1, which is close to the
median redshift of the galaxies in our sample. Blanton et al. have studied the errors in the
K-corrections by comparing the magnitudes produced by the kcorrect routine with broad-
band magnitudes synthesized from the galaxy spectra themse lves. The conclusion is that r, i
and z band magnitudes can be reconstructed to the level of the phot ometry ( ∼ 1 %). The g
and u-band magnitudes have considerably larger errors (5% and 20 %, respectively). We will
not consider u-band magnitudes in this paper.
3 Spectral Diagnostics of Bursts
The break occurring at 4000 ˚
A is the strongest discontinuity in the optical spectrum of a
galaxy and arises because of the accumulation of a large numb er of spectral lines in a narrow
wavelength region. The main contribution to the opacity com es from ionized metals. In hot
stars, the elements are multiply ionized and the opacity dec reases, so the 4000 ˚
A break will
be small for young stellar populations and large for old, met al-rich galaxies. A break index
D(4000) was deﬁned by Bruzual (1983) as the ratio of the avera ge ﬂux density F ν in the bands
4050-4250 ˚
A and 3750-3950 ˚
A. A deﬁnition using narrower continuum bands (3850-3950 ˚
A
and 4000-4100 ˚
A) was recently introduced by Balogh et al (1999). The princi pal advantage
of the narrow deﬁnition is that the index is considerably les s sensitive to reddening eﬀects.
We will adopt the narrow deﬁnition as our standard in this pap er and we denote this index
as D n(4000).
Strong H δ absorption lines arise in galaxies that experienced a burst of star formation
that ended ∼ 0. 1 − 1 Gyr ago. The peak occurs once hot O and B stars, which have wea k
intrinsic absorption, have terminated their evolution. Th e optical light from the galaxies is
then dominated by late-B to early-F stars. Worthey & Ottavia ni (1997) deﬁned an H δ A index
using a central bandpass bracketed by two pseudo-continuum bandpasses. They parametrized
the strength of this feature as a function of stellar eﬀectiv e temperature, gravity and metallicity
using the Lick/IDS spectral library (Gorgas et al. 1993). A s imilar calibration of the 4000
˚
A break strength has been carried out by Gorgas et al (1999). M ost currently available
5
Figure 1: SDSS spectra of a late-type galaxy (top) and an early-type ga laxy (bottom) are plotted
over the interval 3700-4400 ˚
A in the restframe. The red line shows our best ﬁt BC2002 model
spectrum. The light grey shaded regions indicate the bandpa sses over which the D n(4000) index is
measured. The dark grey regions show the pseudocontinua for the H δ A index, while the hatched
region shows the H δ A bandpass.
6
stellar population synthesis models have very low spectral resolution. The resolution of the
Lick/IDS spectral library is 9 ˚
A a factor of 4 lower than that of the SDSS spectra. The
Bruzual & Charlot (1993) models have a 20 ˚
A spectral resolution, far too low to measure the
Hδ absorption feature and D n(4000) index reliably.
High resolution stellar spectral libraries spanning a wide range in metallicity, spectral type
and luminosity class have only recently become available. T he STELIB library (Le Borgne
et al 2002) consists of over 250 stars spanning a range of meta llicities from 0.05 to 2.5 times
solar, a range of spectral types from O5 to M9 and luminosity c lasses from I to V. The
coverage in spectral type is not uniform at all metallicitie s: hot ( Tef f > 20000 K) stars of
sub-solar metallicity are under-represented, and the libr ary lacks very cool ( Tef f < 3500 K)
stars of all metallicities. The spectra cover the wavelengt h range from 3500 to 9500 ˚
A with a
resolution of 3 ˚
A FWHM and a signal-to-noise ratio of ∼ 50. Most of the stars in the library
were selected from the catalogue of Cayrel de Strobel et al. ( 1992), which contains Fe/H
determinations obtained from high resolution spectroscop ic observations. The selection of
stars was optimized to provide good coverage of the HR diagra m. This stellar library has now
been incorporated in the latest version of the Bruzual & Char lot (1993) population synthesis
code. A full description of the code and of the new stellar lib rary will be presented elsewhere
(Bruzual & Charlot 2002). A description of the underlying st ellar evolution prescriptions used
in these models (stellar evolutionary tracks and their semi -empirical extensions) can be found
in Liu, Charlot & Graham (2000).
The evolution of the D n(4000) and H δ A indices following an instantaneous burst of star
formation is illustrated in Fig. 2. The left panels show the e volution of the two indices for a
solar metallicity single-age stellar population (SSP). In order to assess how much systematic
uncertainty there is in the calibration of these two indices, we have compared model predictions
using 3 diﬀerent empirical stellar libraries: 1) the STELIB library with 3 ˚
A resolution (Le
Borgne et al 2002), 2) the Pickles (1998) library with 5 ˚
A resolution, and 3) the Jacoby,
Hunter & Christensen (1984) library with 4.5 ˚
A resolution. Our results show that at ﬁxed
metallicity and age, the variations in the behaviour of the i ndices due to diﬀerences in the
input stellar libraries are ∼ 0. 05 for the D n(4000) index and ∼ 1 ˚
A for H δ A. For very old
stellar populations, the systematic diﬀerences are somewh at larger. In the right panels, we
compare the evolution of the two indices for SSPs of diﬀering metallicity. Results are shown
only for the STELIB library. There are no other high-resolut ion libraries of stars of non-solar
metallicity that span a wide range in wavelength, spectral t ype and luminosity class, so we are
unable to to carry out an analysis of systematic eﬀects for no n-solar models. As can be seen,
the evolution of D n(4000) does not depend strongly on metallicity until ages of more than 10 9
years after the burst. The strongest dependence of the H δ A index on metallicity also occurs
at old ages. The calibration in Fig.2 does not take into accou nt the eﬀects of the velocity
dispersion of the stars in galaxies. We tested whether this w ould make any diﬀerence to our
index calibrations and we ﬁnd that the eﬀects on H δ A and D n(4000) are negligible (We note
that this is not true for all the Lick indices).
Although the time evolution of the D n(4000) and H δ A indices does depend on metallicity,
7
the locus of galaxies in the D n(4000)/Hδ A plane is not as sensitive to metallicity and is a
powerful diagnostic of whether galaxies have been forming s tars continuously or in bursts
over the past 1-2 Gyr. In addition, these two stellar indices are largely insensitive to the dust
attenuation eﬀects that complicate the interpretation of b roadband colours. In Fig. 3 we plot
Hδ A as a function of D n(4000) for “pure burst” star formation histories and for con tinuous
star formation histories spanning a large range of formatio n times tf orm and exponential star
formation timescales. Results are shown for three diﬀerent metallicities. As can be seen, the
continuous models occupy a narrow band in the D n(4000)/Hδ A plane. Galaxies with stronger
Hδ A absorption strength at a given value of D n(4000) must have formed some fraction of their
stars in a recent burst.
In Fig 3. we also show the region of the D n(4000)/Hδ A plane populated by SDSS galaxies.
We show the subset of galaxies for which the error in the measu red value of H δ A is less than
0.8 ˚
A and the error in the D n(4000) index is less than ∼ 0. 03. This cut includes ∼ 25,000
galaxies or 20% of the total sample. The mean errors on the D n(4000) and H δ A indices for the
full sample are 0.048 and 1.4 ˚
A respectively. We have corrected the H δ A measurements for
contamination due to nebular emission. Because the H δ emission is so much weaker than that
at Hα or Hβ , even in the dust-free case, the most robust way to correct fo r it is to scale directly
from the measured H α ﬂux. We use the diﬀerence between the observed H α /Hβ emission line
ﬂuxes and the dust-free case-B recombination value (2.86) t o calculate the attenuation of
the emission lines. We assume an attenuation law of the form τ λ ∝ λ −0. 7 (Charlot & Fall
2000). It is then straightforward to calculate the emission correction to the Hδ A index. We
apply this correction to all galaxies where the H α and Hβ emission lines are measured with
S/N> 3. The typical emission correction to H δ A for late-type galaxies with D n(4000)< 1. 4
is around 1 ˚
A. For early-type galaxies, it is smaller. We have also corre cted the D n(4000)
index for contamination by the [NeIII] emission line at 3869 ˚
A. This only aﬀects a very small
fraction of galaxies – mainly Seyfert IIs. Fig. 3 shows that t here is good agreement between
the area of the D n(4000)/Hδ A plane populated by real galaxies and the values predicted by
the population synthesis models. We now investigate the eﬀe ct of diﬀerent star formation
histories on the estimated stellar mass-to-light ratios of our galaxies.
4 A Library of Star Formation Histories
We use a Bayesian technique to derive estimates of the stella r mass-to-light ratios, dust at-
tenuation corrections and burst mass fractions for each gal axy in our sample. We also derive
associated conﬁdence intervals for each of these parameter s. A generalized description of the
mathematical basis of our technique is given in Appendix A.
In Bayesian statistics, an initial assumption is made that t he data are randomly drawn
from a distribution, which is a family of models characteriz ed by a parameter vector P. One
has to specify a prior distribution on the space of all possib le P. This is a probability density
distribution that encodes knowledge about the relative lik elihood of various P values in the
8
Figure 2: Left: The evolution of D n(4000) and H δ A following an instantaneous, solar-metallicity
burst of star formation. Solid lines show results from BC200 2+STELIB, the dotted line shows results
if the Pickles (1998) library is used, and the dashed line is f or the Jacoby, Hunter & Christensen
(1984) library. Right: The evolution of D n(4000) and H δ A for bursts of diﬀerent metallicity. The
solid line is a solar metallicity model, the dotted line is a 2 0 percent solar model and the dashed line
as a 2.5 solar model.
9
Figure 3: Hδ A is plotted as a function of D n(4000) for 20% solar, solar and 2.5 times solar metallicity
bursts (blue, red and magenta lines), and for 20% solar, sola r and 2.5 solar continuous star formation
histories (blue, red and magenta symbols). A subset of the SD SS data points with small errors are
plotted as black dots. The typical error bar on the observed i ndices is shown in the top right-hand
corner of the plot.
10
absence of any data. Typically one takes a uniform prior in pa rameters with a small dynamic
range and a uniform prior in the logarithm of parameters with a large dynamic range.
We set up our prior distribution by generating a library of Mo nte Carlo realizations of
diﬀerent star formation histories. It is important that our library of models span the full
range of physically plausible star formation histories, an d that it be uniform in the sense that
all histories are reasonably represented and no a priori imp lausible corner of parameter space
accounts for a large fraction of the models.
In our library, each star formation history consists of two p arts:
1. An underlying continuous model parametrized by a formati on time tf orm and and a star
formation time scale parameter γ . Galaxies form stars according to the law SFR(t) ∝
exp[− γt (Gyr)] from time tf orm to the present. We take tf orm to be distributed uniformly
over the interval from the Big Bang to 1.5 Gyr before the prese nt day and γ over the
interval 0 to 1. We do not allow star formation rates that incr ease with time ( γ < 0)
because these are very similar to bursts.
2. We superimpose random bursts on these continuous models. The amplitude of a burst
is parametrized as A = Mburst/M cont, where Mburst is the mass of stars formed in the
burst and Mcont is the total mass of stars formed by the continuous model from time
tf orm to the present. A is distributed logarithmically from 0.03 to 4.0. During the
burst, stars form at a constant rate for a time tburst distributed uniformly in the range
3 × 107 – 3 × 108 years. Bursts occur with equal probability at all times afte r tf orm and
we have set the probability so that 50% the galaxies in the lib rary have experienced a
burst in the past 2 Gyr. Bursting and continuous models are th us equally represented
(recall that our stellar indicators H δ A and Dn(4000) are only sensitive to bursts occurring
during the past 1-2 Gyr). In section 6.2, we explore to what ex tent altering the mix
of continuous and bursty star formation histories changes e stimated parameters such as
the mass-to-light ratios and burst mass fractions.
We adopt the universal initial mass function (IMF) as parame trized by Kroupa (2001). It
is very similar in form to the IMF proposed by Kennicutt (1983 ). Our models are distributed
uniformly in metallicity from 0.25 to 2 times solar. Our ﬁnal library consists of 32,000 diﬀerent
star formation histories. For each history, we store a varie ty of diﬀerent parameters, including
the predicted values of D n(4000), Hδ A, the value of the stellar mass-to-light ratio in the z-band,
the g − r and r − i colours of the stellar populations of the model galaxies, an d the fraction
of the total stellar mass of the galaxy formed in bursts in the past 2 Gyr (we will denote this
parameter as Fburst). Fig. 4 illustrates how our model galaxies populate the D n(4000)/Hδ A
plane. Even though 50% of galaxies have had a starburst of var ying amplitude in the past 2
Gyr, most of the models lie close to the locus of continuous st ar formation histories. The fact
that our models are distributed inhomogeneously in the D n(4000)/Hδ A plane has a signiﬁcant
impact on the conﬁdence intervals we derive for our paramete rs. For example, a galaxy will
have a relatively high probability of being scattered from t he continuous to the bursting region
11
Figure 4: The distribution of galaxies in our model library in the D n(4000)/Hδ A plane.
of the plane by observational errors. It will have a much smal ler probability of being scattered
the other way around. We will illustrate this in more detail i n the next section.
In the left-hand panel of Fig. 5, we divide the D n(4000)/Hδ A plane into bins and we
have colour-coded each bin to reﬂect the average z-band mass-to-light ratio of the simulated
galaxies that fall into it. As can be seen, the mass-to-light ratio is is primarily a sequence in
Dn(4000), but at ﬁxed D n(4000), galaxies with strong H δ absorption have a higher fraction
of young stars and hence have smaller mass-to-light ratios. As well as average values, one
can also compute the 1 σ dispersion in these parameters as a function of position in t he plane.
This is shown in the right hand panel of Fig. 5 and gives an indi cation of the accuracy with
which mass-to-light ratios could be derived from the models if there were no observational
errors and in the absence of dust. As can be seen, the logarith m of the z-band mass-to-light
12
ratio can be determined to better than 0.1 dex for galaxies wi th D n(4000)> 1.6. For galaxies
with D n(4000)< 1.6, log ( M/L )z is still determined to better than 0.15 dex for all but the
very youngest systems.
In Fig. 6, the bins are colour-coded according to the fraction of model SFHs with Fburst
in a given range. The blue/cyan areas of the diagram indicate regions where more than 95%
of the models in the grid have Fburst > 0. 05. If a galaxy has measured indices that lie in
this region and the errors are small, then one can say with hig h conﬁdence that the galaxy
has experienced a burst in the past 2 Gyr. In the region that is colour-coded a darker shade
of blue, 95% of galaxies are currently experiencing or have e xperienced a burst that began
no more than 0.1 Gyr ago. Galaxies in this region may be better termed “starburst” rather
than “post-starburst” systems. The green areas of the diagr am indicate regions where more
than 95% of the models have Fburst = 0. If a galaxy lies in this region, one can say with high
conﬁdence that a galaxy did not form a signiﬁcant fraction of its stellar population in a bur st
in the past 2 Gyr. A signiﬁcant fraction of the diagram is colo ur-coded grey. These regions
contains a mix of bursty and continuous models. The values of Fburst derived for galaxies in
this region will depend strongly on how one chooses the mix of star formation histories in the
library. This is discussed in more detail in section 6.2.
For illustrative purposes, we superpose the same subset of S DSS galaxies plotted in Fig.3
on our colour-coded grid. Once again we see that there is an ex cellent match between the area
of the diagram occupied by the models and the data. There are a lso a signiﬁcant number of
galaxies that lie within the blue bursty region of the plot. A careful analysis of the observa-
tional errors is required before one can assess what fractio n of the objects are “true” bursty
systems. This is discussed in more detail in Paper II (Kauﬀma nn et al. 2002).
5 Parameter Estimation from the Data
In this section, we apply our method to our sample of SDSS gala xies to estimate parameters
such as burst mass fractions, stellar masses and dust attenu ations. For each galaxy in the
sample, we have a measurement of D n(4000) and H δ A as well as an estimate of the error
in these measurements. The likelihood that a galaxy has a giv en value of a parameter is
evaluated by weighting each model in the library by the proba bility function exp( − χ 2/ 2) and
then binning the probabilities as a function of the paramete r value (see Appendix A). The
most likely value of the parameter can be taken as the peak of t his distribution; the most
typical value is its median. We deﬁne the 95% conﬁdence inter val by excluding the 2.5% tails
at each end of the distribution.
5.1 Estimated versus observed values
When the observational uncertainty in a spectroscopic inde x is large, the best estimate of its
true value, taking into account the a priori physical constraints in the population synthesis
13
Figure 5: Left: The D n(4000)/Hδ A plane has been binned and colour-coded to reﬂect the average
z-band mass-to-light ratios of the simulated stellar popula tions that fall into that bin. Magenta
indicates regions with log( M/L )z > 0. 2, red is for 0 . 05 < log(M/L )z < 0. 2, green is for − 0. 1 <
log(M/L )z < 0. 05, blue is for − 0. 4 < log(M/L )z < − 0. 1 and cyan is for log( M/L )z < − 0. 4. Right:
The plane has been binned and colour-coded to reﬂect the 1 σ dispersion in the z-band mass-to-light
ratios. Black indicates regions with σ log(M/L )z < 0. 1, green is for 0 . 1 < σ log(M/L )z < 0. 15 and red is
for σ log(M/L )z > 0. 15.
14
Figure 6: The D n(4000)/Hδ A plane has been binned and colour-coded to reﬂect the fractio n of
simulated galaxies with Fburst in a given range. Blue indicates regions where 95% of the mode l
galaxies have Fburst > 0. 05 and the onset of the burst occurred more than 0.1 Gyr ago. Cy an
indicates regions where 95% of the model galaxies have Fburst > 0. 05 and the onset of the burst
occurred less than 0.1 Gyr ago. Green indicates regions wher e 95% of the model galaxies have
Fburst = 0. Grey indicates all other regions covered by the model gal axies.
15
models, may be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the observed valu e. From now on, we will use the
median value of the derived probability distributions as ou r ”best” estimate of these param-
eters (in practice, the peak and the median usually give simi lar answers). It is informative
to compare the estimated values of D n(4000) and H δ A with the observed values of the same
parameters. The results of this comparison are shown in Fig. 7. For D n(4000), the estimated
and observed values are usually equal to well within the 1 σ observational uncertainty. How-
ever, the diﬀerences between estimated and observed values of H δ A are often considerably
larger. The reason is that the models are homogeneously dist ributed in D n(4000), but het-
erogeneously distributed in H δ A (see Fig. 4). As a result, models with H δ A far away from
the observed value often contribute signiﬁcantly to the pro bability distribution. This is why
the distribution of diﬀerences between H δ A(estimated) and H δ A(observed) shown in Fig. 7 is
broad compared to the same distribution derived for the D n(4000) index.
Fig. 8 compares the 2.5 and 97.5 percentile ranges of the esti mated values of D n(4000) and
Hδ A with the observational errorbars. We note that the observat ional errors on the D n(4000)
index are very small – typically around 0.02 or a few percent o f the total range of values
spanned by the models. On the other hand, the H δ A index has a typical error of 1-2 ˚
A, which
is more than 10% of the range spanned by the models. As can be se en from Fig. 8, the 2.5
and 97.5 percentile ranges of the probability distribution of D n(4000) correspond extremely
well to the 2 σ observational errors. However, the same is not true for H δ A. Because the error
bars on this index are large, the range of acceptable H δ A values is strongly constrained by the
region of parameter space occupied by the models. As a result , 2.5 and 97.5 percentile values
are typically less than 2 σ away from the best estimate. We stress that these eﬀects are d ue
to genuine physical constraints, caused by the fact that H δ A can only extend over a limited
range of values for all possible star formation histories.
5.2 Estimating Burst Mass Fractions
Fig. 9 shows the probability distributions of the parameter Fburst that we derive for three
galaxies drawn from our observational sample.
The top galaxy lies in the region of D n(4000)/Hδ A parameter space occupied by galaxies
that have formed stars continuously over the past few Gyr. Th is is reﬂected in the derived
probability distribution, which is sharply peaked at a valu e of Fburst = 0. There is a small tail
towards non-zero values of Fburst, reﬂecting the fact that the galaxy could have had a small
burst of star formation in the past that would not be detectab le at the present day.
The middle galaxy lies well away from the locus of continuous star formation models.
Dn(4000) and H δ A are both measured with high accuracy. As a result, our derive d probability
distribution indicates that this galaxy must have formed more than about 25% of its stars in
a recent burst. The value of Fburst is not very well constrained. This reﬂects the so-called
age/mass degeneracy: a large burst that occurred long ago is indistinguishable from a smaller
burst that occurred more recently.
The bottom galaxy lies away from the locus of continuous mode ls, but the error on its
16
Figure 7: Left: The distribution of the observed value of D n(4000) minus the estimated one, divided
by the 1 σ measurement error for all galaxies in the SDSS sample. Right: The same thing except for
the H δ A index.
Hδ A index is much larger than that of the middle galaxy. The media n value of the probability
distribution indicates that a typical galaxy with the same H δ A and D n(4000) index measure-
ments will have experienced a burst during the past 2 Gyr. How ever, one cannot say with
any degree of conﬁdence that this particular galaxy must hav e undergone such a burst.
Our method thus provides us with an objective way of deﬁning a sample of “post-starburst”
galaxies from the data. We study the properties of such a samp le in detail in Paper II.
5.3 Estimating the Attenuation of Starlight by Dust
So far, we have only calculated mass-to-light ratios and col ours of the stellar populations
of galaxies. We have not taken into account the attenuation o f the starlight by dust in the
interstellar medium. In the z-band, dust attentuation is not expected to be large, but it m ay
nevertheless have substantial impact on our analysis of mas s-to-light ratios, particularly if
certain kinds of galaxies are much more dusty than others.
We can use our models to estimate the degree of dust attenuati on by comparing our best
estimate of the colours of the galaxies from our model librar y, to the observed colour of the
galaxy. Ideally we should use photometry that is matched to t he ﬁbre aperture to estimate
the dust attenuation. We have chosen to convolve the spectra in our sample with the SDSS g,
r and i-band ﬁlter functions in order to generate a set of synthetic “spectral magnitudes” that
can be compared with the models. We have tested the accuracy o f our spectro-photometry
by comparing the spectral magnitudes of stars drawn from the SDSS to the PSF magnitudes
output by the photometric pipeline PHOTO (see Tremonti et al 2002 for more details). We
17
Figure 8: Left: The 2.5 percentile values of the probability distributions of H δ A and D n(4000)
minus the best estimates, divided by the 1 σ measurement error. Right: The same except for the
97.5 percentile value. These histograms contain the data fo r our full SDSS sample.
18
Figure 9: The left-hand panels show the location of three example gala xies in the D n(4000)/Hδ A
plane. Error bars indicate the measurement errors of the D n(4000) and H δ A indices. The right-hand
panels show the probability distributions of the parameter Fburst for each galaxy.
19
have also subtracted oﬀ the main emission lines, including H α , [NII] and [SII], to generate a
set of true “stellar magnitudes” for our galaxies.
In Fig.10 we compare the g − r versus r − i colours generated from the spectra (black
points) with the colours of the galaxies in our library (blue points). Results are shown for
a random subset of our sample of 120,000 galaxies. We plot obs erver-frame colours at two
diﬀerent redshifts: z = 0 . 03 and z = 0 . 11. In the left panels, we show colours without any
correction for emission lines. The right panels show what ha ppens when emission lines are
removed from the spectra. Over certain redshift ranges, the eﬀect of emission lines on the
colours can be large. The r − i colour is strongly aﬀected by emission at z ∼ 0. 1, because
a set of three strong lines (H α , [NII] and [SII]) are positioned near the edges of the r and i
passbands.
The right-hand panels of Fig.10 show that the data is still oﬀ set from the models, even
after we have corrected for emission lines. This oﬀset is cau sed by dust reddening. The red
arrow on the plot indicates the direction of the reddening ve ctor assuming an attenuation law
of the form τ λ ∝ λ −0. 7. The length of the arrow is appropriate for a galaxy with τ V = 0 . 5,
which is typical for spiral galaxies. We see that reddening w ill move galaxies systematically
to the right of the locus occupied by our models.
We have used the diﬀerence between model colours and the meas ured colours to calculate
the reddening for each galaxy in our sample. By extrapolatin g to the z-band using a stan-
dard attenuation curve of the form τ λ ∝ λ −0. 7, we obtain an estimate of Az, the attenuation
in the z-band expressed in magnitudes. We note that the shape of the a ttenuation curve
determined from direct observations resembles a power law w ith slope ∼ − 0. 7 over a wave-
length range from 1250-8000 ˚
A (Calzetti, Kinney & Storchi-Bergmann 1994). Models based
on a 2-component ISM suggest that the extinction curve may be slightly steeper than this at
longer wavelengths (Charlot & Fall 2000), but we will use a si ngle power-law for simplicity. In
practice, we ﬁnd that comparing g − r or r − i colours yields very similar attenuation values
for most galaxies if the colours are corrected for nebular em ission.
The distribution of Az for our full sample of SDSS galaxies is shown in Fig. 11. The er rors
in our synthesized magnitudes are extremely small and the fo rmal 1 σ error on our estimate
of Az is typically around ± 0.12 mag. This does not take into account systematic errors t hat
may arise as a result of calibration problems. Fig. 11 shows t hat the typical attenuation at
z-band is quite small. The median value of Az is 0.3 mag. Nevertheless there is a long tail
to high values of Az. More than 5% of galaxies in the sample are attenuated by more than
a magnitude in the z-band. The dependences of Az on absolute magnitude and on D n(4000)
are shown in Fig. 12. At luminosities below L∗, the median attenuation increases for more
luminous galaxies. At luminosities above L∗, the median attenuation drops sharply. This
can be explained by the fact that the most luminous galaxies a re predominantly early-type
systems that contain little dust. This is shown more clearly in the right hand panel of Fig.
12, where we see that galaxies with D n(4000)> 1.8 have Az = 0 on average. Fig. 12 also
shows that the galaxies with the youngest stellar populatio ns (small values of D n(4000)) are
the most attenuated by dust. This is expected, because galax ies with young stars contain
20
more gas and hence more dust than galaxies with old stellar po pulations.
5.4 Estimating Stellar Masses and Mass-to-Light Ratios
In this section, we present estimates of the stellar masses a nd mass-to-light ratios of the
galaxies in our sample. To estimate the stellar mass, we ﬁrst need to estimate the dust-
correction to the observed z-band magnitude of the galaxy. When estimating stellar mass es
and mass-to-light ratios, we exclude models with r − i colours redder than the observed colour,
because this would give negative attenuation corrections, which are unphysical. For each
acceptable model, the stellar mass is computed by multiplyi ng the dust-corrected luminosity
of the galaxy by the stellar mass-to-light ratio predicted b y the model. The best estimate of
the mass is then obtained by weighting each model by the proba bility function in the usual
way. Note that in the calculation of our stellar masses, we ar e extrapolating the mass-to-light
ratios and Az values estimated within the ﬁbre to the galaxy as a whole.
In the top panel of Fig. 13, we plot the z-band stellar mass-to-light ratios estimated
from the model as a function of z-band absolute magnitude (corrected to z = 0 . 1) for all
the galaxies in our sample. The mass-to-light ratios are plo tted in solar units, where we
have adopted Mz⊙(z = 0 . 1) = 4 . 51 (Blanton et al. 2002). As can be seen, the distribution
of ( M/L )z(model) is strongly dependent on galaxy luminosity. Almost all very luminous
galaxies have high mass-to-light ratios. Faint galaxies sp an a wider range in ( M/L )z(model).
For guidance, we have marked the value of ( M/L )z(model) for a galaxy that has formed stars
at a constant rate over a Hubble time as a line on the plot. Gala xies with mass-to-light ratios
lower than this value have had star formation histories that are more weighted towards the
present than continuous star formation lasting 10-12 Gyr. O nly a few of the most luminous
galaxies fall into this category, but at faint magnitudes ma ny galaxies have formed a large
fraction of their stars at late times.
The bottom panel of Fig. 13 shows ( M/L )z(model) as a function of the standard con-
centration parameter C, deﬁned as the ratio R90/R 50, where R90 and R50 are the radii
enclosing 90% and 50% of the Petrosian r-band luminosity of the galaxy. It has been shown
by Shimasaku et al (2001) and Strateva et al (2001) that for br ight galaxies, there is a good
correspondence between concentration parameter and ‘by-e ye’ classiﬁcation into Hubble type,
but there is some disgreement about the value of C that marks the boundary between early
and late type galaxies. Strateva et al (2001) claim that gala xies with C > 2. 6 are mostly
early-type systems, whereas spirals and irregulars have 2 < C < 2. 6. Not surprisingly, our
stellar mass-to-light ratios are also correlated with conc entration parameter, with concentrated
(early-type) galaxies exhibiting higher and more uniform v alues of ( M/L )z(model) than less
concentrated (late-type) galaxies.
In Fig. 14, we plot mass-to-light ratios deﬁned in a diﬀerent way:
M
L (galaxy) = Total Mass in Stars
K − corrected luminosity . (2)
21
Figure 10: The observed g − r versus r − i spectral colours of a representative subset of SDSS
galaxies (black points) are compared with our Bruzual-Char lot model grid (blue points) at z = 0. 03
and z = 0 . 11. The colours have been computed by convolving the spectra with the SDSS ﬁlter
functions. In the right panels, the colours are computed aft er emission lines have been removed from
the spectra. The predicted reddening vector assuming an att enuation law of the form τ λ ∝ λ −0. 7 is
shown as a red arrow.
22
Figure 11: The distribution of the estimated values of the dust attenua tion in the z-band for all
the galaxies in the sample. The median value is shown as a vert ical line.
Figure 12: Left: Az is plotted as a function of z-band absolute magnitude for a random subsample
of galaxies . The solid line shows the running median of the di stribution for the full sample. Right:
Az is plotted as a function of D n(4000).
23
The total mass in stars is computed by multiplying the dust-c orrected and K-corrected z-
band luminosity of the galaxy by our estimate of the z-band mass-to-light ratio of its stellar
population. M/L (galaxy) thus tells us how a given observed luminosity translates into stellar
mass. In Fig. 14, we show results in four of the ﬁve SDSS bands ( g, r, i and z). We do not
show results for the u-band because of diﬃculties with the K-corrections. The med ian value
of the mass-to-light ratio in each absolute magnitude bin is shown as a solid symbol. Solid
errorbars mark the 25th to 75th percentile ranges of the dist ributions. Dotted errorbars mark
the 5th to 95th percentile ranges. As can be seen, the median m ass-to-light ratio ﬁrst increases
with luminosity and then appears to ﬂatten. The scatter in M/L (galaxy) at ﬁxed luminosity
decreases at longer wavelengths: it is more than a factor of t wo larger in the g-band than in
the z-band.
In order to make some comparison to related work, we have plot ted as a thick solid line
the mean relation between ( M/L )r(dynamical) and r-band magnitude derived by Bernardi
et al (2002) for a sample of early-type galaxies drawn from th e SDSS. In this analysis
M/L ∝ R0σ 2/L , where R0 is the eﬀective radius of the galaxy and σ is the line-of-sight
velocity dispersion of the stars measured in a 3 arcsecond ap erture. It is interesting that
the relation derived by Bernardi et al agrees well with our M/L (galaxy) estimates for less
luminous galaxies, but lies above our estimates for brighte r galaxies. This may be an indica-
tion that more luminous galaxies contain more dark matter th an less luminous galaxies. We
caution, however, that a more careful analysis is required b ecause the Bernardi et al sample
is carefully selected to contain only galaxies with pure ear ly-type spectra, whereas our sample
includes all galaxies. Note that if we had assumed a Salpeter rather than a Kroupa (2001)
IMF, our stellar mass estimates would have been around a fact or of two larger. For lower
mass ellipticals, they would then be clear contradiction wi th the dynamically-derived mass
estimates.
The distribution of formal errors on our stellar mass estima tes is shown in Fig.14. We
plot the distribution of the 95% conﬁdence range in log M∗, i.e. the range of values of log M∗
obtained when the 2.5% tails at each end of the probability di stribution of log M∗ are excluded.
For a Gaussian distribution of errors, this corresponds to f our times the standard error in the
mass estimate. As can be seen, the 95% conﬁdence interval is t ypically around a factor of ∼ 2
in mass. The errors are smaller for older galaxies with large r 4000 ˚
A breaks than for younger
galaxies with smaller break strengths.
6 Sources of Systematic Error
Fig. 14 indicates that the formal errors on our stellar mass e stimates are small. There are,
however, quite a few sources of possible systematic error. I n this section, we explore some of
these in more detail.
24
Figure 13: T op: Our estimate of z-band mass-to-light ratios of the stellar populations of th e
galaxies in our sample is is plotted as a function of K-correc ted z-band absolute magnitude for
all galaxies in the sample. Bottom: The mass-to-light ratio is plotted as a function of r-band
concentration parameter for all galaxies in the sample. The line indicates the value of ( M/L )z(stars)
for an unextincted galaxy that has been forming stars at a con stant rate for a Hubble time.
25
Figure 14: The total stellar mass of a galaxy divided by its observed lum inosity (K-corrected
to z=0.1) is plotted as a function of absolute magnitude in 4 S DSS bands. The solid symbols
indicate the median mass-to-light ratio at a given magnitud e, the solid errorbars indicate the 25th to
75th percentile ranges of the distribution and the dotted er rorbars indicate the 5th-95th percentile
ranges. Mass-to-light ratios are plotted in solar units whe re M⊙g = 5 . 45, M⊙r = 4 . 76, M⊙i = 4 . 58
and M⊙z = 4. 51 at z = 0. 1. (Blanton et al 2002). The thick solid line is the mean relat ion between
dynamical M/L (estimated from the stellar velocity dispersion) and r-band magnitude for a sample
of early type galaxies from Bernardi et al (2002).
26
Figure 15: The distribution of errors in our stellar mass estimates. Th e quantity plotted is the full
length of the 95% conﬁdence interval in log M ∗. The solid histogram shows the distributions for all
galaxies in the sample. The dotted histogram is for the subse t of galaxies with D n(4000)> 1.8 and
the dashed histogram is for galaxies with D n(4000)< 1.4.
27
6.1 Aperture eﬀects
The D n(4000) and Hδ A indices measured from the SDSS spectra reﬂect the propertie s of the
starlight that found its way down a 3 arcsecond diameter ﬁbre that has been positioned as close
as possible to the centre of the galaxy. One may thus wonder to what extent our estimates
of ( M/L )z may be biased because the index measurements are not accurat ely reﬂecting the
stellar content of the whole galaxy. In particular, apertur e bias could well be a serious problem
for spiral galaxies, where the index measurements may be app ropriate for the central bulge
component, but not for the outer disk where most of the star fo rmation is taking place.
It is possible to address the eﬀect of aperture bias in a stati stical way by comparing the
observed stellar indices and the derived M/L values for similar galaxies viewed at diﬀerent
distances from us. If aperture bias is important, one should see a trend in these quantities
with distance.
This is illustrated in Figs. 16 and 17. We plot the index D n(4000) and the z-band mass-
to-light ratio ( M/L )z as a function of ‘normalized’ distance z/z max, where zmax is the redshift
at which the galaxy drops out of the survey. Normalizing by zmax takes care of any selection
eﬀects that arise when one divides up the sample in diﬀerent w ays. Note that as expected,
galaxies in the survey are distributed uniformly in the quan tity V /V max, so there are many
more objects in the bins with z/z max values close to 1.
Fig. 16 shows the variation in the 4000 ˚
A break as a function of normalized distance. We
see that both the size and the sense of the eﬀect depend strong ly on the absolute magnitude
of the galaxy. Galaxies with luminosities ∼ L∗ (M∗(z) = − 22. 3) exhibit the strongest trend
with z/z max. More distant galaxies have younger stellar populations th an nearby objects, as
expected if the spectra are preferentially sampling the bul ges of nearby galaxies.
Fig. 17 shows how the dust attenuation in the z-band varies as a function of distance.
Our results indicate that Az increases towards the centres of low luminosity galaxies, b ut in
galaxies with luminosities ∼ L∗, the attenuation increases towards the outer regions. In th e
most luminous galaxies in our sample, the attenuation does n ot appear to vary strongly as
a function of radius. The simplest interpretation of these t rends is that our low-luminosity
sample is dominated by disk galaxies, which are known to have have signiﬁcant metallicity
gradients (e.g. Zaritsky, Kennicutt & Huchra 1994). If dust content correlates with metallicity,
one might expect the light from stars in the inner parts of the se galaxies to be more attenuated.
Galaxies with luminosities ∼ L∗ are composite systems consisting of both a bulge and a disk;
starlight from the bulge is expected to be less attenuated th an that from the disk. The
highest luminosity galaxies are primarily ellipticals, wh ich contain very little dust and have
no appreciable gradients in Az.
Finally, Fig. 18 shows the trend in our estimates of ( M/L )z with distance. As can be
seen, the eﬀect of aperture on the mass-to-light ratio is rel atively small. For L∗ galaxies, our
estimate of the the median ( M/L )z decreases by 0.12 dex from one edge of the survey to the
other. For brighter and fainter galaxies, the eﬀect is even s maller. Unfortunately it is not
possible use the relations shown in Figs. 16, 17 and 18 to esti mate the true global mass-to-
28
Figure 16: The D n(4000) index is plotted as a function of z/z max for galaxies in diﬀerent ranges
of z-band absolute magnitude. The solid line indicates the medi an of the distribution as a function
of z/z max. The dashed lines indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles. Th e dotted lines indicate the
5th and 95th percentiles.
light ratio of a given type of galaxy. Even at the outer limit o f the survey, the median fraction
of the total galaxy light that enters the ﬁber is around 50%. A sample of galaxies with large
aperture spectra is required for this purpose. Nevertheles s, our plots make it clear that the
variations in M/L as a function of luminosity and concentration are substanti ally larger than
any biases induced by aperture eﬀects.
6.2 The choice of prior
It is important to understand how our choice of priors may bia s our estimates of parameters
such as mass-to-light ratios or burst mass fractions. The as sumed prior will have little inﬂuence
if error bars are small and the problem is well constrained. B ecause the errors on the H δ A
index are of the same order as the total spread of values in the model grid, parameters such
as Fburst, which depend strongly on the value of the H δ A index, will be inﬂuenced by the mix
of star formation histories contained in our model library.
This is illustrated in Fig. 19 where we compare, for two diﬀer ent choices of prior, our
best estimates of mass-to-light ratio ( M/L )z, attenuation Az and burst mass fraction Fburst.
P1 is our “standard” prior, described in detail in section 4. P2 is a modiﬁed prior where we
have reduced by a factor of 10 the probability of all models wi th bursts in the last 2 Gyr.
In the ﬁrst three panels, we plot the median of the likelihood distribution obtained using P2
versus the median obtained using P1. In the Fburst panel, we only plot those galaxies that
29
Figure 17: The dust attenuation in the z-band Az is plotted as a function of z/z max for galaxies
in diﬀerent ranges of z-band absolute magnitude.
Figure 18: The stellar mass-to-light ratio in the z-band is plotted as a function of z/z max for
galaxies in diﬀerent ranges of z-band absolute magnitude.
30
have Fburst(50%) > 0 for either P1 or P2. As can be seen, our estimates of ( M/L )z and Az
are insensitive to the choice of prior. On the other hand, Fburst(median) does depend strongly
on the fraction of galaxies in the model grid that have experi enced recent starbursts.
In the fourth panel, we compare the median of the likelihood d istributions of Fburst for
the subset of galaxies with Fburst(2. 5%) > 0 for either prior, i.e. we restrict the sample to
galaxies that are very strongly constrained to have experie nced a recent starburst. The lower
right panel of Fig. 19 demonstrates that for these galaxies, Fburst(50%) is insensitive to to the
choice of prior.
This demonstrates that it is valid to use the criterion Fburst(2. 5%) > 0 to select subsamples
of starburst and post-starburst galaxies from our full data set. Fburst(50%) then provides the
best estimate of the fraction of the total mass in stars forme d in the burst mode over the past
2 Gyr.
6.3 Other sources of systematic error
1. Stellar population models Fig. 2 indicates that the diﬀerences in the predicted values
of D n(4000) and H δ A at given stellar age for three diﬀerent input stellar librar ies are
comparable to the measurement errors for those indices. Unf ortunately, we are only able
to carry out this test at solar metallicity, so we are unable t o carry out a fully rigorous
analysis of the systematic uncertainty arising from our cal ibration of these indices.
2. IMF. All our derived parameters are tied to a speciﬁc choice of IMF . Changing the IMF
would scale the stellar mass estimates by a ﬁxed factor. For e xample, changing from a
Kroupa (2001) to a Salpeter IMF with a cutoﬀ at 0.1 M⊙ would result in a factor of 2
increase in the stellar mass.
3. Calibration errors Our dust corrections rely on accurately calibrated spectra l magni-
tudes. Any systematic oﬀsets in the spectrophotometric cal ibrations will result in sys-
tematic errors in these corrections. A full assessment of th e accuracy of the wavelength
and ﬂux calibration of SDSS spectra will be given in Tremonti et al (2002).
7 Comparison with Colour-Based Methods
Most previous attempts to convert from absolute magnitude t o stellar mass have used colours
to constrain the star formation histories of galaxies (e.g. Brinchmann & Ellis 2000; Cole et
al 2001; Bell & de Jong (2001)). Bell & de Jong (2001) argue tha t there should be a tight
relation between the optical colours of spiral galaxies and their stellar mass-to-light ratios.
This relation ought to be insensitive to the eﬀects of dust-r eddening. Although dust causes
colours to become redder, it also makes the galaxy fainter an d for a standard dust attenuation
curve, the two eﬀects compensate. Bell & de Jong (2001) show t hat recent bursts of star
31
Figure 19: The derived values of the mass-to-light ratio ( M/L )z, the attenuation Az, the median
of the likelihood distribution of Fburst, and the lower 2.5 percentile value of this distribution are
compared for two diﬀerent choices of prior.
32
formation introduce scatter into this relation, but claim t hat this should not be important for
most spirals in Tully-Fisher samples.
It is interesting to see whether the stellar masses derived u sing our method correlate with
the observed optical colours of galaxies. In Fig. 20 we plot t he stellar mass-to-light ratio in
the g-band as a function of the Petrosian g − r colours (K-corrected to z = 0. 1) for galaxies in
4 diﬀerent absolute magnitude ranges. We ﬁnd that there is a t ight relation between colour
and stellar mass-to-light ratio. The scatter in log ( M/L )g at given g − r colour is roughly
constant at all magnitudes and has an r.m.s. value of ∼ 0. 3 dex. However, the zero-point of
the relation shifts systematically by about 0.2 dex from the faintest to the brightest galaxies
in our sample. At least part of this eﬀect may be due to the fact that brighter galaxies
have stronger colour gradients (Fig. 16) and our mass-to-li ght will consequently be biased to
higher values than those measured from integrated colours. Overall, the agreement is very
encouraging, as it suggests that SDSS colours may be used to d erive a reasonably accurate
estimate of the stellar masses of nearby galaxies when spect roscopic information is missing.
Note that the r − i colour would not work well because of its sensitivity to emission lines at
redshifts z ∼ 0. 1.
8 An Inventory of the Stellar Mass in the Universe
In this section, we compute how galaxies of diﬀerent types co ntribute to the total stellar
mass budget of the local Universe. Galaxies of diﬀerent lumi nosities can be seen to diﬀerent
distances before dropping out due to the selection limits of the survey. The volume Vmax
within which a galaxy can be seen and will be included in the sa mple goes as the distance
limit cubed, which results in galaxy samples being dominate d by intrinsically bright galaxies.
In this paper we use the simplest available method for correc ting for selection eﬀects, the
Vmax correction method (Schmidt 1968). Each galaxy is given a wei ght equal to the inverse of
its maximum visibility volume determined from the apparent magnitude limit of the survey.
In order to obtain an estimate of the true number density of ga laxies in the Universe, it
is necessary to account for galaxies that are missed due to ﬁb re collisions or spectroscopic
failures. This aﬀects around 10-15% of the galaxies brighte r than the spectroscopic limit of
the survey (Blanton et al 2001). Here, we focus on the relative contribution of diﬀerent kinds
of galaxies to the total stellar mass, so weighting by 1 /V max ought to be suﬃcient. As a check,
we have computed the z-band luminosity function for the galaxies in our sample and ﬁnd that
the Schechter function ﬁt given in Blanton et al (2001) provi des an excellent match to the
shape of the function we derive.
A compendium of results is presented in Fig. 21. We plot the fr action of the total stellar
mass contained in galaxies as a function of their stellar mas s, D n(4000), g − r colour, Fburst,
size, concentration index and surface mass density. Note th at we have adopted a cosmology
with Ω = 0 . 3, Λ = 0 . 7 and H 0= 70 km s −1 Mpc−1 in our calculations. From these plots
it is possible to read oﬀ the characteristic properties of th e galaxies that contain the bulk
33
Figure 20: The g-band mass -to-light ratio is plotted as a function of the g − r colour (K-corrected
to z=0.1) for galaxies in 4 diﬀerent bins of z-band absolute magnitude. The dashed red line shows
the mean relation evaluated for galaxies with − 21 < M (z) < − 20.
34
of the stellar mass in the Universe at the present day. Note th at because we have 122,808
galaxies in the total sample, we are able to derive extremely accurate functional forms for
these distributions. The bins around the peaks of the distri butions shown in Fig. 21 each
contain 5000 or more galaxies. Even in the wings, most bins ar e still sampled by a few hundred
objects. In Table 1, we list the median, 1%, 5%, 25%, 75%, 95% a nd 99% percentile values
for each of the distributions shown in Fig. 21 (with the excep tion of Fburst).
Our main conclusions are the following:
• The characteristic mass Mchar of galaxies at the present day, deﬁned as the peak of the
distribution function shown in the top left panel of Fig. 21, is 6 × 1010M⊙. This agrees
reasonably well with the results of Cole et al. (2001). These authors transform the near-
infrared luminosity function derived from 2dF/2MASS data t o a stellar mass function
using a colour-based technique. Their Schechter-function parametrization yields Mchar =
5. 6 × 1010M⊙ for H 0= 70 km s −1 Mpc−1 and a Kennicutt (1983) IMF, which is fairly
close to the Kroupa (2001) IMF that we have assumed.
We ﬁnd that only 20% of the total stellar mass is contained in g alaxies less massive
than 10 10M⊙. An even smaller fraction ( ∼ 1%) of the total mass is contained in galaxies
less massive than 10 9M⊙. The total stellar mass budget of the Universe is thus heavil y
weighted towards galaxies that are within a factor of 10 in ma ss of the Milky Way.
• The D n(4000) distribution of the stellar mass is strongly bimodal . The ﬁrst peak is
centred at D n(4000)∼ 1. 3. Galaxies with break strengths of this value have r-band
weighted mean stellar ages of ∼ 1 − 3 Gyr and mass-weighted mean ages a factor of ∼ 2
larger. Almost all these galaxies also have emission lines a nd are thus forming stars at
the present day. The second peak is centred at D n(4000)∼ 1. 85, a value typical of old
elliptical galaxies with mean stellar ages ∼ 10 Gyr.
• The g − r colour distribution exhibits a strong red peak, but the blue peak is much less
pronounced. This is probably because colours depend both on stellar age and on dust
attenuation, whereas D n(4000) is not aﬀected by dust. Note that Strateva et al (2001)
have also discussed the bimodality in the colour distributi ons of SDSS galaxies.
• The vast majority ( > 90%) of the stellar mass is in galaxies that have not formed mo re
than 5% of the stars in a burst in the past 2 Gyr.
• The distribution of stellar mass as a function of galaxy half -light radius in the r-band
(R50) is peaked at ∼ 3 kpc. For the radius containing 90% of the light ( R90) it is peaked
at ∼ 8 kpc. More than 90% of the total stellar mass in the Universe r esides in galaxies
with R50 and R90 that are within a factor of three of these values.
• The distribution of stellar mass as a function of concentrat ion index is broad, with no
pronounced peak at any particular value. If we adopt C = 2 . 6 as the demarcation
between early and late-type galaxies, then 50% of the total s tellar mass is contained in
35
the early-types. If we adopt C = 3, then only 10% of the mass is contained in such
systems.
• We deﬁne the surface mass density µ ∗ as 0 . 5M∗/ (πz 2
50), where z50 is the Petrosian half-
light radius in the z-band. Most of the stellar mass in the Universe resides in gal axies
with µ ∗ within a factor of 2 of 10 9M⊙ kpc−2.
Table 1: Percentiles of the distribution of the fraction of the total stellar mass contained
in galaxies of diﬀerent types shown in Fig. 21
Parameter Median 1% 5% 25% 75% 95% 99%
log M∗ (M⊙) 10.493 9.249 9.542 10.108 10.799 11.139 11.342
Dn(4000) 1.609 1.105 1.120 1.350 1.838 2.012 2.119
g − r (z=0.1) 0.816 0.238 0.380 0.634 0.906 1.095 1.411
R50 (kpc) 3.225 0.249 0.740 2.042 4.636 7.190 9.652
R90 (kpc) 8.748 0.784 2.075 5.417 12.177 19.386 27.014
C = R90/R 50 2.493 1.767 1.896 2.201 2.787 3.106 3.284
log µ ∗ (M⊙ kpc−2) 8.745 7.327 7.810 8.453 8.958 9.242 9.484
9 Summary and Discussion
We have developed a new method to constrain the past star form ation histories of galaxies. It
is based on two stellar absorption line indices, the 4000 ˚
A break strength D n(4000) and the
Balmer absorption line index H δ A. Together these two indices allow us to place constraints on
the mean age of the stellar population of a galaxy and the frac tion of its stellar mass formed
in recent bursts.
We have generated a library of Monte Carlo realizations of diﬀerent star formation histories,
which includes bursting as well as continuous models and a wi de range of metallicities. We
use the library to generate estimates and conﬁdence interva ls for a variety of parameters for
a sample of 122,808 galaxies drawn from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, These include:
1. Fburst the fraction of the stellar mass of the galaxy formed in burst s in the past two Gyr.
2. Az the attenuation of the rest-frame z-band light due to dust.
36
8 9 10 11 12
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
1 1.5 2 2.5
0
0.05
0.1
0 0.5 1
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
g-r                        
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
-4
-2
0
0 5 10 15
0
0.05
0.1
0 10 20 30
0
0.05
0.1
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
7 8 9 10
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Figure 21: The fraction of the total stellar mass in the Universe contai ned in galaxies as a function
of 1) log stellar mass, 2) D n(4000), 3) g − r colour K-corrected to z=0.1, 4) Fburst (median) solid
and Fburst(2.5%) dotted , 5) Petrosian half-light radius in the r-band, 6) Petrosian 90% radius on
the r-band, 7) concentration index ( R90/R 50), 8) log surface mass density. The fraction is shown
linearly in all plots except that for Fburst where the logarithm is given.
37
3. Stellar mass-to-light ratios in the g, r, i and z bands.
4. Stellar masses.
Note that the analysis can be extended to include other param eters describing the star
formation history of a galaxy, but not all parameters are equ ally well-constrained. For exam-
ple, the luminosity-weighted or mass-weighted mean stella r ages have large errors, because of
the rather strong dependence of the 4000 ˚
A break on metallicity at ages of more than 1-2
Gyr (see Fig. 2).
In the ﬁrst part of the paper, we have illustrated in detail ho w our methods can be applied
to galaxies in the SDSS and we have estimated the conﬁdence wi th which we can constrain
basic parameters such as stellar mass. In the second part of t he paper, we have presented a
number of astrophysically interesting applications of our methods.
We have shown that the attenuation of the z-band light due to dust depends strongly on
both the absolute magnitude and the mean stellar age of a gala xy. We have also studied the
distribution of stellar mass-to-light ratios of galaxies a s a function of absolute magnitude in
the four SDSS pass bands. We have shown that the distribution of M/L is strongly dependent
on galaxy luminosity in all photometric bands. Almost all ve ry luminous galaxies have high
mass-to-light ratios. Faint galaxies have lower mass-to-l ight ratios, but also span a wider
range in M/L . We have also shown that the scatter in M/L at a given luminosity is a factor
of ∼ 2 smaller in the z-band than it is in the g-band. Finally, we have computed how galaxies
of diﬀerent types contribute to the total stellar mass budge t of the Universe.
In the standard paradigm for structure formation in the Univ erse, galaxy formation occurs
hierarchically through the merging of small protogalactic condensations to form more and more
massive systems. In this picture, the contribution of diﬀer ent kinds of galaxies to the stellar
mass budget is expected to evolve strongly with redshift. Th e rate and form of this evolution
depend not only on the values of cosmological parameters suc h as Ω and Λ, but also on the
physical processes that control the rate at which stars form in galaxies. For example, if star
formation rates are enhanced during galaxy-galaxy mergers , the fraction of stars formed in
recent bursts should rise strongly with redshift, simply be cause merging rates and gas fractions
were higher in the past (see for example Kauﬀmann & Haehnelt 2 000).
Although it is now clear that the integrated star formation r ate density increases strongly
to higher redshifts (Madau et al 1996), it is still not unders tood which galaxies undergo the
strongest evolution or which physical processes cause gala xies to form stars more rapidly in
the past. In the next few years, there will be a number of new la rge redshift surveys of the
faint galaxy population. These surveys will contain enough galaxies to carry out an inventory
of the stellar mass at z ∼ 1. When these results are compared with the distributions de rived
from the SDSS, it will be possible to draw quantitative concl usions about how galaxies have
evolved over the past two thirds of a Hubble time and to begin d isentangling the eﬀects of
the diﬀerent processes that may have inﬂuenced this evoluti on.
38
We thank the anonymous referee for detailed comments that he lped improve our method-
ology.
S.C. thanks the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, the Fede ral Ministry of Educa-
tion and Research, and the Programme for Investment in the Fu ture (ZIP) of the German
Government for their support.
The Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) is a joint project of The U niversity of Chicago,
Fermilab, the Institute for Advanced Study, the Japan Parti cipation Group, The Johns Hop-
kins University, Los Alamos National Laboratory, the Max-P lanck-Institute for Astronomy
(MPIA), the Max-Planck-Institute for Astrophysics (MPA), New Mexico State University,
Princeton University, the United States Naval Observatory , and the University of Washing-
ton. Apache Point Observatory, site of the SDSS telescopes, is operated by the Astrophysical
Research Consortium (ARC).
Funding for the project has been provided by the Alfred P. Slo an Foundation, the SDSS
member institutions, the National Aeronautics and Space Ad ministration, the National Sci-
ence Foundation, the U.S. Department of Energy, the Japanes e Monbukagakusho, and the
Max Planck Society. The SDSS Web site is http://www.sdss.or g/.
39
Appendix A
Here we describe the mathematical underpinning of the Bayes ian likelihood estimates for
parameters such as Fburst, Az and M/L that we derive in this paper.
Let us recall the basis of Bayesian statistics for this kind o f problem. An initial assumption
is made that the data are randomly drawn from a distribution w hich is a member of a model
family characterised by a parameter vector P. The dimension of P can, in principle, be
arbitrarily large. In particular, it can be much larger than the number of points N in the
dataset to be ﬁtted. The goal is then to use the data to deﬁne a l ikelihood function on the
space of all possible P. This function can be used to obtain a best estimate and conﬁd ence
interval for any model property Y( P).
In Bayesian statistics one has to specify a prior distributi on on the space of all possible P.
This is a probability density distribution fp(P) which encodes knowledge about the relative
likelihood of various P values in the absence of any data. For example, the physicall y accessible
range for each element of P may be limited. Typically one takes a uniform prior in parame ters
with a small dynamic range and a uniform prior in the log of par ameters with a large dynamic
range.
The likelihood of a particular value of P given a speciﬁc dataset d is then written as a
posterior probability density function (using Bayes’ theo rem) as
f (P |d)dP = Afp(P)P r{d |P}dP (3)
where A is a constant which is adjusted so that f (P |d) normalises correctly to unity and
P r{d |P} is the probability of the observed dataset on the hypothesis that the underlying
distribution is described by the particular parameter set P.
The likelihood of the derived parameter Y( P) given the data is then
f (Y |d)dY =
∫
Y
f (P |d)dP (4)
where the integral extends over all P for which Y lies in a speciﬁed bin ± dY/2. Note that
there is no regularity requirement on the function Y( P) other than piecewise continuity so
it makes sense to deﬁne a probability density. The most likel y value of Y can then be taken
as the peak of this distribution; the most typical value as it s median; the 95% (symmetric)
conﬁdence interval for scalar Y can be deﬁned by excluding th e 2.5% tails at each end of the
distribution.
When applied to the kinds of problems presented in this paper , the prior is taken to be
the distribution of possible star formation histories in th e comparison library, which can be
viewed as a Monte Carlo sampling of fp(P). The integral in the above expression for the
likelihood of Y is then trivially evaluated through binning the integrand as a function of Y.
The expression for P r{d |P} is also straightforward for our case, since we have a measure of
each element of d and we can assume the errors are normal with known correlatio n matrix C.
In this situation
40
P r{d |P} ∝ exp[− (d − dp(P)). C−1. (d − dp(P))/ 2] (5)
where dp(P) is the data vector predicted by the model with parameters P. The argument of
the exponential is then just minus one half of χ 2.
It is worth noting that this procedure makes no assumptions a bout the shapes of the
distributions fp(P), f (P |d) or f (Y |d). The ﬁrst can be assumed at will, and for small
error bars and a well constrained problem should have little eﬀect on the answer. The other
two are then derived consistently. The important assumptio ns are that the model makes a well
deﬁned and speciﬁc prediction for the value of the observabl e in the absence of observational
errors (in practice there will be some degree of theoretical uncertainty and this could be
included in C if it can be modelled as Gaussian) and that the ob served data d have a known
observational error which can be assumed Gaussian with cova riance matrix C.
41
References
Balogh, M.L., Morris, S.L., Yee, H.K.C., Carlberg, R.G., El lingson, E., 1999, ApJ, 527, 54
Bell, E.F., De Jong, R., 2001, ApJ, 550, 212
Bernardi, M., Sheth, R.K., Annis, J., Burles, S., Eisenstei n, D.J., Finkbeiner, D.P., Hogg, D.W.,
Lupton, R.H., Schlegel, D.J., SubbaRao, M. et al., 2002, AJ, submitted (astro-ph/0110344)
Blanton, M.R., Dalcanton, J., Eisenstein, D., Loveday, J., Strauss, M.A., SubbaRao, M., Wein-
berg, D.H., Andersen, J.E. et al., 2001, AJ, 121, 2358
Blanton, M.R., Brinkmann, J., Csabai, I., Doi, M., Eisenste in, D., Fukugita, M., Gunn, J.E.,
Hogg, D.W., Schlegel, D.J., 2002, AJ, submitted
Blanton, M.R. et al., 2002, SDSS preprint
Brinchmann, J., Ellis, R.S., 2001, ApJ, 536, L77
Bruzual, A.G., 1983, ApJ, 273, 105
Bruzual, A.G., Charlot, S., 1993, ApJ, 405, 538
Calzetti, D., Kinney, A., Storchi-Bergmann, T., 1994, ApJ, 429, 582
Cayrel de Strobel, G, Hauck, B., Francois, P., Thevenin, F., Friel, E., Mermilliod, M., Borde, S.,
1992, A&AS, 95, 273
Charlot, S., Fall, S.M., 2000, ApJ, 539, 718
Cole, S., Norberg, P., Baugh, C.M., Frenk, C.S., Bland-Hawt horn, J., Bridges, T., Cannon, R.,
Colless, M. et al, 2001, MNRAS, 326, 255
Fukugita, M., Ichikawa, T., Gunn, J.E., Doi, M., Shimasaku, K., Schneider, D.P., 1996, AJ, 111,
1748
Gorgas, J., Faber, S.M., Burstein, D., Gonzalez, J.J., Cour teau, S., Proseer, C., 1993, ApJS, 86,
153
Gorgas, J., Cardiel, N., Pedraz, S., Gonzalez, J.J., 1999, A &AS, 139, 29
Gunn, J.E., Carr, M., Rockosi, C., Sekiguchi, M., Berry, K., Elms, B., de Haas, E., Ivezic, Z. et
al, 1998, AJ, 116, 3040
Hogg, D.W., Finkbeiner, D.P., Schlegel, D.J., Gunn, J.E., 2 001, AJ, 122, 2129
Jacoby, G.H., Hunter, D.A., Christian, C.A., 1984, ApJS, 56 , 257
Kauﬀmann G., Haehnelt M., 2000, MNRAS, 311, 576
42
Kauﬀmann, G., Heckman, T.M., White, S.D.M., Charlot, S., Tr emonti,C., Peng, E.W., Seibert,
M., Brinkmann, J. et al, 2002, MNRAS, submitted (astro-ph/0 2005070)
Kennicutt, R.C., 1983, ApJ, 272, 54
Kroupa, P., 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231
Le Borgne, J.-F., Bruzual, A.G., Pello, R., Lancon, A., Rocc a-Volmerange, B., Sanahuja, B.,
Schaerer, D., Soubiran, C., Vilchez-Gomez, R., 2002, in pre paration (http://webast.ast.obs-
mip.fr/stelib)
Liu, M.C., Charlot, S., Graham, J.R., 2000, ApJ, 543, 644
Lupton, R.H. et al, 2002, in preparation
Madau, P., Ferguson, H.C., Dickinson, M.E., Giavalisco, M. , Steidel, C.C., Fruchter, A., 1996,
MNRAS, 283, 1388
McKay, T.A., Sheldon, E.S., Racusin, J., Fischer, P., Selja k, U., Stebbins, A., Johnston, D.,
Frieman, J.A. et al., 2002, ApJ, submitted (astro-ph/01080 13)
Pickles, A.J., 1998, PASP, 110, 863
Schlegel, D.J., Finkbeiner, D.P., Davis., M., 1998, ApJ, 50 0, 525
Shimasaku, K., Fukugita, M., Doi, M., Hamabe, M., Ichikawa, T., Okamura, S., Sekiguchi, M.,
Yasuda, N. et al, 2001, AJ, 122, 1238
Schmidt, M., 1968, ApJ, 151, 393
Smith, J.A., Tucker, D.L., Kent, S., Richmond, M.W., Fukugi ta, M., Ichikawa, T., Ichikawa,
S.I.,Jorgensen, A.M. et al. 2002, AJ, in press
Stoughton, C., Lupton, R.H., Bernardi, M., Blanton, M.R., B urles, S., Castander, F.J., Connolly,
A.J., Eisenstein, D.J. et al., 2002, AJ, 123, 485
Strateva, I., Ivezic, Z., Knapp, G.R., Narayanan, V.K., Str auss, M.A., Gunn, J.E., Lupton, R.H.,
Schlegel, D. et al, 2001, AJ, 122, 1861
Strauss, M.A., Weinberg, D.H., Lupton, R.L., Narayanan, V. K., Annis, J., Bernardi, M., Blanton,
M., Berles, M. et al., 2002, AJ, accepted (astro-ph/0206225 )
Tremonti, C.A. et al., 2002, in preparation
Verheijen, M.A.W., 2001, ApJ, 563, 694
Wang, B., Heckman, T.M., 1996, ApJ, 457, 645
Worthey, G., Ottaviani, D.L, 1997, ApJS, 111, 377
43
York D.G., Adelman J., Anderson J.E., Anderson S.F., Annis J ., Bahcall N.A., Bakken J.A.,
Barkhouser R. et al., 2000, AJ, 120, 1579
Zaritsky, D., Smith, R., Frenk, C.S., White, S.D.M., 1993, A pJ, 405, 464
Zaritsky, D., Kennicutt, R.C.. Huchra, J.P., 1994, ApJ, 420 , 47
44